Custom Device migration from LLB to PPL (#38)
ni/niveristand-custom-device-handbook: docs/Migrating_LLB_to_a_PPL_based_Custom_Device.md

## Migrating from LLB to PPL

> First introduced with LabVIEW 2010, a packed project library (PPL) is a compiled LabVIEW project library (.lvlib) that contains all the .project library VIs and allows the user to call the public VIs in a manner that is identical to the use of the original .project library. Since LabVIEW 2017 you can compile a packed project library to be also used with newer versions of LabVIEW. This option is enabled by default, but if you want to change that setting, choose "Advanced" in the sidebar and disable the option "Allow future versions of LabVIEW" to load this packed library. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First introduced with LabVIEW 2010, a packed project library (PPL) is a compiled LabVIEW project library (.lvlib) that contains all the .project library VIs and allows the user to call the public VIs in a manner that is identical to the use of the original project library. Since LabVIEW 2017 you can compile a packed project library to be also used with newer versions of LabVIEW. This option is enabled by default, but if you want to change that setting, choose "Advanced" in the sidebar and disable the option "Allow future versions of LabVIEW" to load this packed library. 
```

![](images/BuildSpecification.PNG)

**Information Settings**

Select *Information* from the left menu and rename the PPL in the *Build Specification Name* field. Following convention, there are some rules to consider in order to organize the built files properly, so that, they can be easily copied/moved to the VeriStand Custom Device's directory once the build is complete (It would be worth mentioning that the *Post Build Action VI* mentioned in the next section, operates based on the same naming and path convention).

 a) Custom Device System Explorer

![](images/PPL_Config_Info.PNG)

* The destination path should have the following structure: **"..\built\Custom Device Name\Operating System** 

> * The name of the packed library file should have the following format: **Custom Device Name** + **Configuration** + **Operating System Name** (you can see an example for the name and path of a System Explorer file on Windows)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The name of the packed library file should have the following format: **Custom Device Name** + **Configuration** (you can see an example for the name and path of a System Explorer file on Windows)
```

**Note:** if you need an LLB configuration to be included in one PPL, Select the LLB you want to include and Press the bottom blue arrow (the one circled in BLUE).

![](images/PPL_Config_Source.png)
* Select **Information** from the left menu, and rename the PPL as you wish in the **Build Specification Name** field.

**Note:** Check the **Destionation Directory** field, in some cases you might need to change the path.

![](images/PPL_Config_Info.PNG)

* Press **Build** and you should see this window after the build finishes:  

![](images/ppl_done.PNG)

After you are done check if you have a PPL for each LLB. 

**Note:** You should configure PPLs also for the Real Time targets build specifications.

The last step is to make the necessary changes in the XML file. For this you will need to change the path for each LLB with the path of each corresponding PPL.
For example, the following image represents the XML code sequence for the custom device RT Driver VI on a Windows target. 

![](images/XML_Engine_Path_LLB.PNG)

> You need to change what comes after the `&lt;Path&gt;` tag.
> 
> ![](images/XML_Engine_Path_PPL.PNG)
> 
> Here you can see the `&lt;Path&gt;` contains a path for a VI located inside a PPL. You need to update all the `&lt;Path&gt;` tags in the XML that reference VIs inside the newly created PPLs.
> 
> **Note:** You need to update also the `&lt;RealTimeSystemDestination&gt;` tags.

Reviewer: Fixing tags for rendering mode.
```suggestion
You need to change what comes after the `<Path>` tag.

![](images/XML_Engine_Path_PPL.PNG)

Here you can see the `<Path>` contains a path for a VI located inside a PPL. You need to update all the `<Path>` tags in the XML that reference VIs inside the newly created PPLs.

**Note:** You need to update also the `<RealTimeSystemDestination>` tags.
```

> ## Migrating a Custom Device from LLB to PPL

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Migrating from LLB to PPL
```

> First introduced with LabVIEW 2010, a packed project library is a compiled .lvlib that contains all of the .lvlib’s VIs and allows the user to call the public VIs in a manner that is identical to the use of the original .lvlib. Since 
> LabVIEW 2017 you can compile a packed project library to be also used with newer versions of LabVIEW. This option is enabled by default, but if you want to change that setting, choose "Advanced" in the sidebar and disable the option "Allow future versions of LabVIEW" to load this packed library. 
> Using PPLs for packaging VeriStand Custom Devices does not eliminate the usage of LLBs for the same purpose. A developer does not have to chose between using one or another. The two options can coexist as part of the same project. A developer can keep the existing LLB build specifications and simply add to the project the additional PPL ones. Of course, it might be necessary to modify the CD source code in order to be able to support both options - this will be discussed below. The XML configuration file would have to be modified as well to reflect the new loading paths for the CD elements. 

Reviewer: Do you want this section to be one phrase?
```suggestion
First introduced with LabVIEW 2010, a packed project library (PPL) is a compiled LabVIEW project library (.lvlib) that contains all of the .project library VIs and allows the user to call the public VIs in a manner that is identical to the use of the original .project library. Since LabVIEW 2017 you can compile a packed project library to be also used with newer versions of LabVIEW. This option is enabled by default, but if you want to change that setting, choose "Advanced" in the sidebar and disable the option "Allow future versions of LabVIEW" to load this packed library. 

Using PPLs for packaging VeriStand Custom Devices does not eliminate the usage of LLBs for the same purpose. A developer does not have to chose between using one or another. The two options can coexist as part of the same project. A developer can keep the existing LLB build specifications and simply add to the project the additional PPL ones. Of course, it might be necessary to modify the CD source code in order to be able to support both options. The XML configuration file would have to be modified as well to reflect the new loading paths for the CD elements.
```

> ### Advantages of using PPL based Custom Devices

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Benefits for using PPL based Custom Devices
```

Packed Project Libraries (PPL) provide name spacing for all of its contained items and preserve the file hierarchy of the source project library. These features result in several potential benefits for a Custom Device packed in a PPL:

> * Even if two given custom devices would reference the same file (VI) dependency, by packaging them into PPLs, each custom device would receive its own copy of the required dependency. This would be compiled and included in its respective PPL via name spacing for the contained items, the PPLs would also make sure that load-time conflicts are avoided.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If two given custom devices would reference the same VI dependency, by packaging them into PPLs, each custom device would receive its own copy of the required dependency. This would be compiled and included in its respective PPL via namespacing for the contained items. The PPLs would also make sure that load-time conflicts are avoided.
```

* Since PPLs preserve the file hierarchy of the source project library, that solves the issue of internal naming conflicts, which is specific to LLBs (which causes compile-time warnings and extra files to be generated). Multiple LabVIEW project libraries can be included in the same PPL, even if those contain items with the same name. This is the same reason why LabVIEW classes could now be easier used when building VeriStand Custom Devices.

> * Much smaller disk footprint, which is important for a lot of our customers, since it would have a large impact on the deployment time (as you can see for the FPGA Addon below). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Much smaller disk footprint, which would improve the deployment time (as you can see for the FPGA Addon below). 
```

![](images/Disk_Footprint.jpg)

> ### Drawbacks of using Packed Project Libraries with VeriStand Custom Devices

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Drawbacks of using PPL based Custom Devices
```

> * Probably one of the main issues is that inside the PPL, relative paths for the items are maintained starting from the most common directory on the disk. This can be confusing for LabVIEW developers that would expect the relative paths to start from the root of the library and follow the original project structure. Additionally, it also means that changing the organization, or location on the disk, of the items that are included in the library build specification could in turn affect the relative paths of the items in the packed library. In time, this behavior could prove to be quite a challenge (or at least a nuisance), since changes within the custom device folder structure could affect the organization of the items in the generated packed library. In turn, this would create the need to constantly update the configuration XML file with the new paths. The long-term solution to this issue would be to create a post-build step that could perform these operations automatically: i.e. parse the configuration XML file and identify the items with "path" properties. For each item, find the corresponding element within the generated packed library and update the configuration file. Once the update is complete (and with no errors), copy the resulting files to the VeriStand Custom Device directory. Certain LabVIEW features are not compatible with packed project libraries. For instance, malleable VIs (VIMs) cannot be included in a PPL and exported as public members, they can only be set with private scope. Implicitly, if a custom device code makes use of malleable VIs, packing it inside a PPL would require some changes (to either the code or the project level) to maintain compatibility.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* One of the main drawback is that inside the PPL, relative paths for the items are maintained starting from the most common directory on disk. This can be confusing for LabVIEW developers that would expect the relative paths to start from the root of the library and follow the original project structure. Additionally, it also means that changing the organization, or location on disk, of the items that are included in the library build specification could in turn affect the relative paths of the items in the packed library. In time, this behavior could prove to be quite a challenge (or at least a nuisance), since changes within the custom device folder structure could affect the organization of the items in the generated packed library. In turn, this would create the need to constantly update the configuration XML file with the new paths. The long-term solution to this issue would be to create a post-build step that could perform these operations automatically: i.e. parse the configuration XML file and identify the items with "path" properties. For each item, find the corresponding element within the generated packed library and update the configuration file. Once the update is complete (and with no errors), copy the resulting files to the VeriStand Custom Device directory.
* Certain LabVIEW features are not compatible with packed project libraries. For instance, malleable VIs (VIMs) cannot be included in a PPL and exported as public members, they can only be set with private scope. Implicitly, if a custom device code makes use of malleable VIs, packing it inside a PPL would require some changes (to either the code or the project level) to maintain compatibility.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> * Certain VeriStand Custom Device APIs (like the NI VeriStand Custom Device Channel APIs) are using the Global Data References 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Certain VeriStand Custom Device APIs (like the NI VeriStand Custom Device Channel APIs) are using Global Data References.
```

> * Mutation code might be required for individual custom devices if custom data types (for instance, clusters) are used internally and stored within the System Definition file, if we want to ensure backwards compatibility. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### Implementing a PPL based Custom Device

> For creating a new packed project library based Custom Device you will begin by building a template project. You can find the necessary template here: [VeriStand Custom Device Wizard](https://github.com/ni/niveristand-custom-device-wizard/releases). The new template will be available starting with VeriStand 2021 (Custom Device Wizard LabView 2021 support 21.0). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For creating a new packed project library based Custom Device you can start from a Custom Device template project. You can choose one for your application from the [VeriStand Custom Device Wizard](https://github.com/ni/niveristand-custom-device-wizard/releases).
```

> ### Migrating an existing Custom Device

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Migrating to a PPL based Custom Device from an LLB one
```

> First step for migrating an existing Custom Device is to make some changes regarding the global data references if you use certain VeriStand Custom Device APIs.
> For performance reasons, channel values are stored in VeriStand as a single block of data - i.e. as an array of double values. To be able to access a value element corresponding to a given channel, VeriStand is using Global Variables to pass pointer information, from the engine, to the calling APIs. While this works well for custom devices packed in LLBs, the same does not apply for packed project libraries, due to namespacing. Essentially, when compiling a PPL, a separate (namespaced) copy of the global variable is created and included with it. In turn, it cannot be used anymore for data transfer between the VeriStand engine and the running custom device and would result in a runtime error. Custom devices that do not use this kind of APIs are not affected by this issue. For instance, mainly Inline custom devices ( and derivatives of this type) are affected, since custom devices of Async type are using RT FIFOs to access channel values.
> To be able to mitigate this problem, we need to implement an  alternative way to access the values within these global variables. 
> This code needs to be incapsulated within a single VI ("Initialize Global Variables"). It has to be called only once from within the target custom device and, for an Inline type, it would have to be called specifically in the "Read Data from HW" state of the "RT Driver" due to the specifics of the initialization of the VeriStand engine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you use certain VeriStand Custom Device APIs, which is the case for an inline custom device, the first step to migrate an existing Custom Device would include changes regarding how the global data references are initialized.

For performance reasons, channel values are stored in VeriStand as a single block of data - i.e. as an array of double values. To be able to access a value element corresponding to a given channel, VeriStand is using Global Variables to pass pointer information, from the engine, to the calling APIs. While this works well for custom devices packed in LLBs, the same does not apply for packed project libraries, due to namespacing. Essentially, when compiling a PPL, a separate (namespaced) copy of the global variable is created and included with it. In turn, it cannot be used anymore for data transfer between the VeriStand engine and the running custom device and would result in a runtime error. To be able to mitigate this problem, we need to implement an alternative way to access the values within these global variables.

The initialization code below needs to be incapsulated within a subVI ("Initialize Global Variables"). It has to be called only once from within the target custom device and, for an Inline type, it would have to be called specifically in the "Read Data from HW" case of the "RT Driver" due to how the VeriStand engine initializes.
```

![](images/GlobalVariableINIT.PNG)

> ![](images/GlobalReference2.PNG)

Reviewer: The highlighted content from this image needs to look more user friendly. Some examples you can check from the handbook can be seen here: [Planning the Custom Device](https://niveristand-custom-device-handbook.readthedocs.io/en/latest/Planning_The_Custom_Device.html)

Example 1:
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/62251693/145840206-f9f263bf-2b6c-4a32-bdf0-2ec2cb0a282c.png)

Example 2:
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/62251693/145840277-468d8f90-fb6c-432a-9833-6d520772f89d.png)

Example 3: [Inline-Async Hardware Interface](https://niveristand-custom-device-handbook.readthedocs.io/en/latest/Custom_Device_Types.html#inline-async-hardware-interface)

The next step is to create a packed project library for each LLB you have in the project. The PPL needs to have the same configuration. To do so, you need to right click on **Built Specifications** » **New** » **Packed Library**. 

![](images/BuildSpecification2.PNG)

> The window for configurating your packed library will open. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The window for configuring your packed library will open.
```

> * You need to select **Source Files ** in the left menu. You will have a list with all the LLBs in your project and you need to select one for which you want to copy the configuration. After you select it you will need to press the top blue arrow (the one circled in RED).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* You need to select **Source Files** in the left menu. You will have a list with all the LLBs in your project and you need to select one for which you want to copy the configuration. After you select it you will need to press the top blue arrow (the one circled in RED).
```

> **Note** if you need a LLB configuration to be included in one PPL, Select the LLB you want to include and Press the bottom blue arrow ( the one circled in BLUE).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note** if you need an LLB configuration to be included in one PPL, Select the LLB you want to include and Press the bottom blue arrow (the one circled in BLUE).
```

> ![](images/PPL_Config_Source.png)

Reviewer: This image needs to be redone, the border around the snip looks a bit messy. You can use "window snip" mode from widows snipping tool, and that will make all the work for you.

* Select **Information** from the left menu, and rename the PPL as you wish in the **Build Specification Name** field.

> **Note** Check the **Destionation Directory** field, in some cases you might need to change the path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note:** Check the **Destionation Directory** field, in some cases you might need to change the path.
```

![](images/PPL_Config_Info.PNG)

> * Press **Done** and you should see this window: 

Reviewer: I think you wanted to say "Press Build" ?

```suggestion
* Press **Build** and you should see this window after the build finishes: 
```

> ![](images/ppl_done.PNG)

Reviewer: This image needs to be regenerated, please use "window snip mode" to get rid of the messy border.

After you are done check if you have a PPL for each LLB. 

> **Note** You should be carefull to configure PPL for the targets too.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note:** You should be carefull to configure PPL for the targets too.
```

> **Note:** You should be carefull to configure PPLs for the targets too.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note:** You should configure PPLs also for the Real Time targets build specifications.
```

> The last step is to make the necessary changes in the XML file. For this you will need to change the path for each LLB with the path of each coresponding PPL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The last step is to make the necessary changes in the XML file. For this you will need to change the path for each LLB with the path of each corresponding PPL.
```

> For example, the following image represents  the XML code sequence for the custom device RT Driver VI on a Windows target. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, the following image represents the XML code sequence for the custom device RT Driver VI on a Windows target. 
```

![](images/XML_Engine_Path_LLB.PNG)

> You need to change what comes after the **Path** tag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You need to change what comes after the `&lt;Path&gt;` tag.
```

![](images/XML_Engine_Path_PPL.PNG)

> Here you can see the Path is changed to the one that the PPL has. You need to do the same for every **Path** tag in the XML.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here you can see the `&lt;Path&gt;` contains a path for a VI located inside a PPL. You need to update all the `&lt;Path&gt;` tags in the XML that reference VIs inside the newly created PPLs.
```

> **Note** Do not forget about the Real Time destination.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note:** Do not forget about the Real Time destination.
```

> **Note:** Do not forget about the Real Time destination.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note:** You need to update also the `&lt;RealTimeSystemDestination&gt;` tags.
```
